[MUSIC]
>> Douglas Crockford: So the idea of
functions in programming languages came
from the idea of subroutines,
which was some piece of code which
could be called from multiple places.
And in various languages, at various
times, has been called subs, procedures,
procs, funcs, functions, and lambdas,
but they're all the same idea.
>> Douglas Crockford: So why did
that occur in programming languages?
There are a number of good reasons.
The first one was code reuse.
It was recognized that there were certain
patterns in programs that happened over
and over and over again.
And being able to isolate those was
originally a memory conserving device.
A more useful reason turns
out to be decomposition.
Where we can take a complicated
problem and break it down into smaller
simpler problems, each of those
represented as a function or subroutine.
Then there was modularity.
These things can have interfaces that
they can defend, becoming black boxes.
And that makes them much
easier to reason about.
It turns out that there is
expressive power to subroutines.
That essentially you're designing
your own language based on a library
of things that you can collect and
put together.
Then finally, we'll get to this in
the next talk, higher order functions.
Where functions become parameters and
functions become return values.
And that pushes programming
to a whole another level.
It's quite amazing.
>> Douglas Crockford: One of the things
that was discovered around Lisp in 1958
was recursion, where a function
can be defined in terms of itself.
This is an idea that
came from mathematics but
is brilliantly implemented in
modern programming languages.
>> Douglas Crockford: One of the best
examples of recursion is the Quicksort.
This is the entire algorithm.
You divide an array into two groups,
low and high.
So you start with an array, you pick
a point in the middle, everything that's
bigger than a value goes to one side,
everything smaller goes to the other side.
And then you call Quicksort
again on those two sides.
And that's it,
that's the entire algorithm, it's amazing.
And Quicksort turns out to be
a very fast sorting technique.
In the average case, it's n log n,
which is pretty good for a sort.
And it falls out trivially from
the definition of recursion.
>> Douglas Crockford: But there's
a guy named Tennent who wrote a book
called The Principles of
Programming Languages.
And he came up with
a principle of correspondence,
which showed a correspondence
between variables and parameters.
And in languages like JavaScript,
variables and parameters are the same
thing, basically, in that one
can be represented as the other.
And this shows two implementations
of factorial that both
do exactly the same thing,
that both act on something called result.
But in one of them, result is a variable,
in the other, result is a parameter.
The parameter acts as a variable in that
it's been created within a function, which
is invoked immediately, which provides
the initial value for the parameter.
>> Douglas Crockford: There are some
people who took that idea of being able
to take any expression and encapsulate
it in a function which is immediately
invoked without changing
the meaning of the thing.
And that may be a useful
thing to have in a language,
particularly if you have macros or
some other thing which wants to act on
pieces of program as if they were data.
And this almost works in JavaScript.
You can take almost any expression,
or almost any statement, and
wrap it in an immediately
invoked function.
And it almost works,
except if the expression contains var or
function or break or continue or return,
because the meaning of all those change
when you put them inside of a function.
And also, this in arguments also change
But other than that,
those two expressions are equivalent.
>> Douglas Crockford: Let's see, closure,
wow, how to sneak up on this one.
>> Douglas Crockford: So
the original Lisp had static scoping,
I'm sorry, all right,
let me skip that one.
Okay, we'll go to the definitions.
Okay, closure is one of the really
central ideas to JavaScript.
And unfortunately,
it's called closure, which is bad.
It comes from set theory, where one
thing can be closed over another thing,
which is unfortunate.
Cuz most people think of the word closure
as meaning retribution or vengeance.
You're like, I've been wronged and
I'm gonna get me some closure.
And this isn't anything like that.
This has to do with the vitality
of the state of a function.
So the context of an inner function
includes the scope of the outer function.
Just because of the rules scoping and
nesting.
The weird thing is that the inner function
enjoys their context even after the parent
function or
the other function has returned.
Otherwise, function scope
works like block scope.
So let me show you an example of what
that means, cuz those way too abstract.
So here we got a little piece of code.
We're defining a function
called digit_name.
And it's gonna take a number,
and it's gonna return a string,
which is the name of that number.
Now, the problem with the way I wrote
this is that names is a global variable.
Which means if there's anything
else in my program called names,
then it's gonna conflict with this one.
And either my program's gonna fail or
they're gonna fail, or
maybe we'll both fail, and that's bad.
And there's no way to test for that in
general because you can't predict all of
the code your code's ever
gonna have to run with.
So especially true on the web
in ad-supported sites.
Because there's no way you can anticipate
what's going to be in all the ads you're
gonna run with.
And ads contain some of the worst
code you have ever seen.
They contain lots of global
variables with lots of stupid names.
And there's a good chance
you're gonna fail on that, and
there's no way you can anticipate it.
So the only defense is to try to reduce
your use of global variables as much
as possible.
So here's another way we
can write this function.
Now names is a private variable
of the digit_name function.
And this works.
So because it's inside the function scope,
it's not visible outside of the function,
so it will not conflict
with any other global name.
So that's good.
The thing that's wrong with this one is,
every time we call digit_name,
we're going to have to create an array,
put ten things in it only to take one
thing out, which is hugely inefficient.
Now an optimizing compiler might notice
that names is variant over invocations and
try to factor that out.
But JavaScript compilers don't do that and
probably never will.
Because an optimizing compiler can
take many minutes to do its work and
the web wants to start right now.
So there's never gonna be time
to do that kind of optimization.
So we have to do that
optimization ourselves.
And it turns out it's easy to do.
So I now have a function, and
it's got the names variable as before.
But now instead of returning a value for
names,
it's returning a function that's
gonna return the value from names.
And we're going to invoke it immediately,
okay?
So what's being assigned to
digit_name is not this function,
it's the result of the function,
which is the green function.
>> Douglas Crockford: Now,
once we do that assignment,
this outer function has returned,
it has completed its work, it's done.
But then when we call digit_name
down here, we get the three, okay?
So this function continues to
enjoy access to that variable even
after the function that created
that variable has gone.
Everybody with me?
This is the most important thing
I'm gonna tell you all day, so
it's really important that
everybody be with me on this step.
>> Douglas Crockford: If you don't
understand how this function works,
you gotta tell me now.
>> Douglas Crockford: All right,
we all got it?
Okay, so let's try this one more
time from a different point of
view
>> Douglas Crockford: So
this is back to the initial problem,
we got the global variable and that's bad.
But one thing what I can do, is because
of the thing we just talked about,
where we can take any expression and
put it inside of an immediately
invoked function, so I can do that.
I can take the original function and wrap
it in another function, I can do that.
Cuz it means exactly the same thing.
Everybody with me?
Okay, so then all I am gonna do is
move the names thing inside of there,
get the same thing.
>> Douglas Crockford: Everybody
still with me?
>> Douglas Crockford: Now, there are some
people who have proposed a possible
optimization, where it involves
changing the value of digit_name.
So initially, digit_name is the function
which will create the names array.
And after it's called the first time,
it will replace itself with the function
that extracts things from that array.
The theory being that you
don't have to pay for
the cost of the names until
the first time you need to do it.
So if it turns out you never call this
function, then you never pay that cost.
I don't like this for a couple of reasons.
The first one is that we're changing
the value of that function as we're going.
That kind of self-modification is
confusion and I don't like confusion.
But worse than that, we're breaking
the first class list of our function.
Because I can take my digit_name and
I can put it in another object
where it's gonna act as a method.
And when I call the function from over
there, it's gonna go through here,
change the value of digit_name, but this
guy doesn't see that digit_name changed.
So it means that now every time I call
this function, I'm going to have to pay
this overhead because I've broken
the first classness of the function.
I think this is a really bad form.
Now, you could fix this by
putting an if statement in it.
>> Douglas Crockford: But
it's not worth it.
So you could ask, why?
You might notice that the cost of
the statement if you run this function
a million times, but if you're gonna
run it a million times, you're gonna
break other things long before you get to
the point where you notice that payoff.
And if you're that concerned about
optimizing the case where you're
running the case a million times,
you shouldn't be trying to optimize
the case where you do it zero.
That seems to me a really bad trade-off.
>> Douglas Crockford: So
if you look at scopes as sets,
it's exactly inside-out of
how the functions look.
So here I've got an outer yellow function.
What I can see from that function is x.
But from the inner green function,
I can see x and y, okay?
And you can see that scope is
completely enclosed by the other scope.
That's where the word
enclosure comes from.
So here's an example from the browser.
It's a fade function.
It's going to take some
element of the DOM and
cycle it through the colors yellow
to white in however long that takes.
And the idea is that there's gonna be
something changing on the page and we just
want to get the user's attention on it
briefly, and we'll do it by color cycling.
So we'll start with the fade function.
We'll pass in the id of the DOM
element that we want to be colorizing.
We'll go to getElementById
to get that DOM node.
We'll set our variable level to 1.
We'll create a step function.
And we'll call setTimeout,
passing that step function,
telling to call it in a tenth of a second.
And then it's finished.
Okay, at this point, fade has completed,
it's done it's work, it is complete.
Suddenly, a tenth of a second later,
setTimeout causes step to run, okay?
So setTimeout goes to his level and
changes it to a hex string.
It's getting the level
of the fade function.
Okay, so it's remembering the value
that the outer function had.
It doesn't have a copy of that variable,
it is still bound to that very variable.
Okay, it will then go to that DOM node,
it knows what node it is because
its parent looked it up, and
it will change its background color.
We'll then look again at the level and
ask, is it 15 yet?
If not, it will change it and
call set timeout again.
Okay, again, it's not changing its copy,
it is changing the original variable.
So every time it looks at it, it will
see the current value of that variable.
And it will keep doing until it
gets to 15, and then it stops.
Now one of the nice things about doing
all this in a function, and the way that
function's scope work, is I could fade
on two DOM elements at the same time.
Go fade, fade.
And those two will work, but
they will not interfere with each other.
Cuz each call to fade creates it's own
DOM and level in step values, which
are completely distinct and held inside of
their scope from all other invocations.
And so there's no way they can conflict,
unless maybe you told them to fade
on the same guy at the same time.
In that case, you got trouble.
But otherwise, this is a very clean,
very elegant way of managing your program.
>> Douglas Crockford: And so
a later method, I think I'll skip that.
It's kind of redundant for
some stuff we're gonna do later.
I'll skip that one too, and that one.